README.md, before:

# 🛡️ Personal Finance Anomaly Detector

> **End-to-end fraud detection system using machine learning and real-time analytics**

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://python.org)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.104+-green.svg)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com)
[![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/React-18+-61DAFB.svg)](https://reactjs.org)
[![XGBoost](https://img.shields.io/badge/XGBoost-2.0+-orange.svg)](https://xgboost.readthedocs.io)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE)

## 🎯 **Project Overview**

A production-ready fraud detection system that identifies fraudulent financial transactions in real-time using advanced machine learning. Built with modern MLOps practices and deployed as a full-stack web application.

### **🏆 Key Achievements**
- **92.2% ROC-AUC** fraud detection accuracy
- **73.2%** fraud detection rate with only **9.3%** false alarms
- **<200ms** prediction response time
- **Real-time** transaction analysis with confidence scoring

---

## 🚀 **Live Demo**

### **🌐 Try the Live Application:**
- **Dashboard**: [https://fraud-detector-demo.vercel.app](https://fraud-detector-demo.vercel.app)
- **API Documentation**: [https://fraud-api.railway.app/docs](https://fraud-api.railway.app/docs)
- **Health Check**: [https://fraud-api.railway.app/health](https://fraud-api.railway.app/health)

### **📱 Features Available:**
- **Real-time Fraud Detection** - Analyze individual transactions
- **Batch Processing Dashboard** - Test multiple transactions with analytics
- **Model Insights** - View performance metrics and feature importance
- **Risk Classification** - LOW/MEDIUM/HIGH/CRITICAL risk levels

---

## 🛠️ **Technical Stack**

### **Machine Learning Pipeline**
- **Algorithm**: XGBoost Classifier with hyperparameter optimization
- **Features**: 15 engineered features from transaction data
- **Validation**: 5-fold stratified cross-validation
- **Metrics**: ROC-AUC, PR-AUC, confusion matrix analysis

### **Backend Architecture**
- **Framework**: FastAPI (Python 3.10+)
- **API Design**: RESTful with automatic OpenAPI documentation
- **Processing**: Real-time prediction + batch processing endpoints
- **Deployment**: Docker containerized on Railway

### **Frontend Application**
- **Framework**: React 18 + TypeScript
- **UI Library**: Material-UI for professional design
- **Charts**: Recharts for data visualizations
- **Deployment**: Vercel with global CDN

### **DevOps & Infrastructure**
- **Containerization**: Docker for consistent deployments
- **CI/CD**: GitHub Actions for automated testing
- **Hosting**: Railway (backend) + Vercel (frontend)
- **Monitoring**: Built-in health checks and error handling

---

## 📊 **Model Performance**

| Metric | Score | Business Impact |
|--------|-------|-----------------|
| **ROC-AUC** | 92.2% | Excellent discrimination between fraud/normal |
| **PR-AUC** | 13.0% | Strong performance on imbalanced data |
| **Fraud Detection Rate** | 73.2% | Catches 7 out of 10 fraudulent transactions |
| **False Alarm Rate** | 9.3% | Only 1 in 10 normal transactions flagged |
| **Precision** | 1.3% | Acceptable for fraud detection use case |

### **🎯 Business Value**
- **Risk Reduction**: Prevents significant financial losses
- **Customer Trust**: Minimizes false positives for better UX
- **Scalability**: Handles high-volume transaction processing
- **Compliance**: Meets financial industry standards

---

## 🏗️ **Project Structure**

```
finance-anomaly-detector/
├── 📁 ml/                          # Machine Learning Pipeline
│   ├── 📁 data/
│   │   ├── 📁 processed/           # Clean, feature-engineered data
│   │   └── 📁 raw/                 # Original dataset
│   ├── 📁 experiments/             # Model experiments & results
│   ├── 📁 models/                  # Trained model artifacts
│   └── 📁 scripts/                 # ML training & evaluation scripts
├── 📁 backend/                     # FastAPI Application
│   ├── app.py                      # Main API application
│   ├── Dockerfile                  # Container configuration
│   └── requirements.txt            # Python dependencies
├── 📁 frontend/                    # React Dashboard
│   ├── 📁 src/
│   │   ├── 📁 components/          # React components
│   │   └── 📁 services/            # API client services
│   ├── package.json                # Node.js dependencies
│   └── vercel.json                 # Deployment configuration
├── 📁 docs/                        # Technical documentation
└── 📄 README.md                    # This file
```

---

## 🚀 **Quick Start**

### **1. Clone the Repository**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/finance-anomaly-detector.git
cd finance-anomaly-detector
```

### **2. Run Backend (API)**
```bash
cd backend
pip install -r requirements.txt
python app.py
```
**API available at**: `http://localhost:8000`

### **3. Run Frontend (Dashboard)**
```bash
cd frontend
npm install
npm start
```
**Dashboard available at**: `http://localhost:3000`

### **4. Test the System**
- Open the dashboard in your browser
- Try the sample transaction generators
- View real-time fraud detection results
- Explore the analytics dashboard

---

## 🧪 **API Usage Examples**

### **Single Transaction Prediction**
```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/predict" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "Amount": 149.62,
    "V1": -1.3598, "V2": -0.0727, "V3": 2.5363,
    "V4": 1.3781, "V5": -0.3383, "V6": 0.4623,
    "V7": 0.2394, "V8": 0.0986, "V9": 0.3637,
    "V10": 0.0906, "V11": -0.5515, "V12": -0.6178,
    "V13": -0.9912, "V14": -0.3112
  }'
```

### **Response Example**
```json
{
  "is_fraud": false,
  "fraud_probability": 0.0234,
  "risk_level": "LOW",
  "confidence": "HIGH",
  "timestamp": "2024-06-19T17:30:00Z"
}
```

---

## 📈 **Model Development Process**

### **1. Data Exploration & Analysis**
- Comprehensive EDA revealing 588:1 class imbalance
- Statistical significance testing for feature selection
- Correlation analysis and outlier detection

### **2. Feature Engineering**
- 15 features selected from 41 original features
- Created interaction features (V1×V3, Amount×V3)
- Statistical aggregations (std, min, max of V features)

### **3. Model Training & Optimization**
- Compared Random Forest, XGBoost, and LightGBM
- Hyperparameter tuning with 5-fold cross-validation
- Addressed class imbalance with scale_pos_weight

### **4. Model Interpretation**
- SHAP values for feature importance
- ROC and Precision-Recall curve analysis
- Business threshold optimization

---

## 🔧 **Deployment Guide**

### **Option 1: One-Click Deploy**
[![Deploy to Railway](https://railway.app/button.svg)](https://railway.app/template)
[![Deploy to Vercel](https://vercel.com/button)](https://vercel.com/new)

### **Option 2: Manual Deployment**
Detailed deployment instructions available in [`DEPLOYMENT.md`](DEPLOYMENT.md)

---

## 📚 **Documentation**

### **📖 Technical Documentation**
- [**API Documentation**](docs/API.md) - Complete API reference
- [**Model Documentation**](docs/MODEL.md) - ML pipeline details
- [**Deployment Guide**](DEPLOYMENT.md) - Production deployment
- [**Architecture Overview**](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) - System design

### **🎓 Learning Resources**
- [**Model Experiments**](ml/experiments/) - Performance analysis
- [**Feature Analysis**](ml/experiments/plots/) - Visual insights

---

## 🎯 **Use Cases & Applications**

### **Financial Services**
- Real-time transaction monitoring
- Credit card fraud prevention
- Risk assessment for loan applications
- Compliance monitoring

### **E-commerce Platforms**
- Payment fraud detection
- Account takeover prevention
- Chargeback reduction
- Customer trust enhancement

### **Business Intelligence**
- Fraud pattern analysis
- Risk scoring models
- Regulatory reporting
- Performance monitoring

---

## 🛡️ **Security & Privacy**

- **Data Privacy**: No actual financial data stored
- **API Security**: Rate limiting and input validation
- **Model Security**: Encrypted model artifacts
- **Infrastructure**: HTTPS encryption and secure hosting

---

## 🤝 **Contributing**

Contributions are welcome! Please read our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) and [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

### **Development Setup**
```bash
# Install development dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
cd frontend && npm install

# Run tests
python -m pytest
npm test
```

---

## 📄 **License**

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 👨‍💻 **Author**

**Your Name**
- 💼 [LinkedIn](https://linkedin.com/in/yourprofile)
- 🐙 [GitHub](https://github.com/yourusername)
- 📧 [Email](mailto:your.email@example.com)
- 🌐 [Portfolio](https://yourportfolio.com)

---

## 🏆 **Project Highlights for Recruiters**

### **Technical Skills Demonstrated**
- **Machine Learning**: End-to-end ML pipeline with production deployment
- **Backend Development**: FastAPI, RESTful APIs, Docker containerization
- **Frontend Development**: React, TypeScript, responsive design
- **DevOps**: CI/CD, cloud deployment, monitoring

### **Business Impact**
- **Problem Solving**: Addressed real-world fraud detection challenges
- **Performance**: Achieved industry-standard accuracy metrics
- **Scalability**: Built for high-volume transaction processing
- **User Experience**: Professional dashboard with intuitive design

### **Best Practices**
- **Clean Code**: Well-structured, documented, and tested
- **Documentation**: Comprehensive technical and user documentation
- **Version Control**: Professional Git workflow and commit history
- **Deployment**: Production-ready with proper CI/CD pipeline

---

<div align="center">

**⭐ Star this repository if you found it helpful!**

[**🚀 View Live Demo**](https://fraud-detector-demo.vercel.app) | [**📖 Documentation**](docs/) | [**🐙 Source Code**](https://github.com/yourusername/finance-anomaly-detector)

</div>

Commit message:

docs: Update README with live deployment URL and add V1-V14 explanations
- Updated README with correct Render deployment URL
- Added explanation section for PCA-transformed V1-V14 fields
- Updated author information and GitHub links
- Added UI improvements with tooltips and info alert explaining the anonymized features
- Added helper text to make the interface more user-friendly

README.md, after:

# 🛡️ Personal Finance Anomaly Detector

> **End-to-end fraud detection system using machine learning and real-time analytics**

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://python.org)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.104+-green.svg)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com)
[![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/React-18+-61DAFB.svg)](https://reactjs.org)
[![XGBoost](https://img.shields.io/badge/XGBoost-2.0+-orange.svg)](https://xgboost.readthedocs.io)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE)

## 🎯 **Project Overview**

A production-ready fraud detection system that identifies fraudulent financial transactions in real-time using advanced machine learning. Built with modern MLOps practices and deployed as a full-stack web application.

### **🏆 Key Achievements**
- **92.2% ROC-AUC** fraud detection accuracy
- **73.2%** fraud detection rate with only **9.3%** false alarms
- **<200ms** prediction response time
- **Real-time** transaction analysis with confidence scoring

---

## 🚀 **Live Demo**

### **🌐 Try the Live Application:**
- **Live Application**: [https://anomaly-detector-g2ex.onrender.com](https://anomaly-detector-g2ex.onrender.com)
- **API Documentation**: [https://anomaly-detector-g2ex.onrender.com/docs](https://anomaly-detector-g2ex.onrender.com/docs)
- **Health Check**: [https://anomaly-detector-g2ex.onrender.com/health](https://anomaly-detector-g2ex.onrender.com/health)

### **📱 Features Available:**
- **Real-time Fraud Detection** - Analyze individual transactions
- **Batch Processing Dashboard** - Test multiple transactions with analytics
- **Model Insights** - View performance metrics and feature importance
- **Risk Classification** - LOW/MEDIUM/HIGH/CRITICAL risk levels

### **📊 Understanding the Input Fields:**
The V1-V14 fields represent **anonymized principal components** from PCA (Principal Component Analysis) transformation:
- **V1-V14**: These are dimensionality-reduced features that capture patterns in the original transaction data
- **Amount**: The actual transaction amount in dollars
- **Why PCA?**: For privacy protection, the original features (like merchant, location, time) have been transformed into these mathematical components
- **Sample Values**: Use the "Normal Sample" or "Suspicious Sample" buttons to see typical value ranges

---

## 🛠️ **Technical Stack**

### **Machine Learning Pipeline**
- **Algorithm**: XGBoost Classifier with hyperparameter optimization
- **Features**: 15 engineered features from transaction data
- **Validation**: 5-fold stratified cross-validation
- **Metrics**: ROC-AUC, PR-AUC, confusion matrix analysis

### **Backend Architecture**
- **Framework**: FastAPI (Python 3.10+)
- **API Design**: RESTful with automatic OpenAPI documentation
- **Processing**: Real-time prediction + batch processing endpoints
- **Deployment**: Docker containerized on Railway

### **Frontend Application**
- **Framework**: React 18 + TypeScript
- **UI Library**: Material-UI for professional design
- **Charts**: Recharts for data visualizations
- **Deployment**: Vercel with global CDN

### **DevOps & Infrastructure**
- **Containerization**: Docker for consistent deployments
- **CI/CD**: GitHub Actions for automated testing
- **Hosting**: Railway (backend) + Vercel (frontend)
- **Monitoring**: Built-in health checks and error handling

---

## 📊 **Model Performance**

| Metric | Score | Business Impact |
|--------|-------|-----------------|
| **ROC-AUC** | 92.2% | Excellent discrimination between fraud/normal |
| **PR-AUC** | 13.0% | Strong performance on imbalanced data |
| **Fraud Detection Rate** | 73.2% | Catches 7 out of 10 fraudulent transactions |
| **False Alarm Rate** | 9.3% | Only 1 in 10 normal transactions flagged |
| **Precision** | 1.3% | Acceptable for fraud detection use case |

### **🎯 Business Value**
- **Risk Reduction**: Prevents significant financial losses
- **Customer Trust**: Minimizes false positives for better UX
- **Scalability**: Handles high-volume transaction processing
- **Compliance**: Meets financial industry standards

---

## 🏗️ **Project Structure**

```
finance-anomaly-detector/
├── 📁 ml/                          # Machine Learning Pipeline
│   ├── 📁 data/
│   │   ├── 📁 processed/           # Clean, feature-engineered data
│   │   └── 📁 raw/                 # Original dataset
│   ├── 📁 experiments/             # Model experiments & results
│   ├── 📁 models/                  # Trained model artifacts
│   └── 📁 scripts/                 # ML training & evaluation scripts
├── 📁 backend/                     # FastAPI Application
│   ├── app.py                      # Main API application
│   ├── Dockerfile                  # Container configuration
│   └── requirements.txt            # Python dependencies
├── 📁 frontend/                    # React Dashboard
│   ├── 📁 src/
│   │   ├── 📁 components/          # React components
│   │   └── 📁 services/            # API client services
│   ├── package.json                # Node.js dependencies
│   └── vercel.json                 # Deployment configuration
├── 📁 docs/                        # Technical documentation
└── 📄 README.md                    # This file
```

---

## 🚀 **Quick Start**

### **1. Clone the Repository**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/BernardOforiBoateng/finance-anomaly-detector.git
cd finance-anomaly-detector
```

### **2. Run Backend (API)**
```bash
cd backend
pip install -r requirements.txt
python app.py
```
**API available at**: `http://localhost:8000`

### **3. Run Frontend (Dashboard)**
```bash
cd frontend
npm install
npm start
```
**Dashboard available at**: `http://localhost:3000`

### **4. Test the System**
- Open the dashboard in your browser
- Try the sample transaction generators
- View real-time fraud detection results
- Explore the analytics dashboard

---

## 🧪 **API Usage Examples**

### **Single Transaction Prediction**
```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/predict" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "Amount": 149.62,
    "V1": -1.3598, "V2": -0.0727, "V3": 2.5363,
    "V4": 1.3781, "V5": -0.3383, "V6": 0.4623,
    "V7": 0.2394, "V8": 0.0986, "V9": 0.3637,
    "V10": 0.0906, "V11": -0.5515, "V12": -0.6178,
    "V13": -0.9912, "V14": -0.3112
  }'
```

### **Response Example**
```json
{
  "is_fraud": false,
  "fraud_probability": 0.0234,
  "risk_level": "LOW",
  "confidence": "HIGH",
  "timestamp": "2024-06-19T17:30:00Z"
}
```

---

## 📈 **Model Development Process**

### **1. Data Exploration & Analysis**
- Comprehensive EDA revealing 588:1 class imbalance
- Statistical significance testing for feature selection
- Correlation analysis and outlier detection

### **2. Feature Engineering**
- 15 features selected from 41 original features
- Created interaction features (V1×V3, Amount×V3)
- Statistical aggregations (std, min, max of V features)

### **3. Model Training & Optimization**
- Compared Random Forest, XGBoost, and LightGBM
- Hyperparameter tuning with 5-fold cross-validation
- Addressed class imbalance with scale_pos_weight

### **4. Model Interpretation**
- SHAP values for feature importance
- ROC and Precision-Recall curve analysis
- Business threshold optimization

---

## 🔧 **Deployment Guide**

### **Option 1: One-Click Deploy**
[![Deploy to Railway](https://railway.app/button.svg)](https://railway.app/template)
[![Deploy to Vercel](https://vercel.com/button)](https://vercel.com/new)

### **Option 2: Manual Deployment**
Detailed deployment instructions available in [`DEPLOYMENT.md`](DEPLOYMENT.md)

---

## 📚 **Documentation**

### **📖 Technical Documentation**
- [**API Documentation**](docs/API.md) - Complete API reference
- [**Model Documentation**](docs/MODEL.md) - ML pipeline details
- [**Deployment Guide**](DEPLOYMENT.md) - Production deployment
- [**Architecture Overview**](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) - System design

### **🎓 Learning Resources**
- [**Model Experiments**](ml/experiments/) - Performance analysis
- [**Feature Analysis**](ml/experiments/plots/) - Visual insights

---

## 🎯 **Use Cases & Applications**

### **Financial Services**
- Real-time transaction monitoring
- Credit card fraud prevention
- Risk assessment for loan applications
- Compliance monitoring

### **E-commerce Platforms**
- Payment fraud detection
- Account takeover prevention
- Chargeback reduction
- Customer trust enhancement

### **Business Intelligence**
- Fraud pattern analysis
- Risk scoring models
- Regulatory reporting
- Performance monitoring

---

## 🛡️ **Security & Privacy**

- **Data Privacy**: No actual financial data stored
- **API Security**: Rate limiting and input validation
- **Model Security**: Encrypted model artifacts
- **Infrastructure**: HTTPS encryption and secure hosting

---

## 🤝 **Contributing**

Contributions are welcome! Please read our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) and [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

### **Development Setup**
```bash
# Install development dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
cd frontend && npm install

# Run tests
python -m pytest
npm test
```

---

## 📄 **License**

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 👨‍💻 **Author**

**Bernard Ofori Boateng**
- 🐙 [GitHub](https://github.com/BernardOforiBoateng)
- 💼 [LinkedIn](https://linkedin.com/in/bernardoforiboateng)
- 📧 [Email](mailto:bernard.ofori.boateng@example.com)
- 🌐 [Portfolio](https://bernardoforiboateng.com)

---

## 🏆 **Project Highlights for Recruiters**

### **Technical Skills Demonstrated**
- **Machine Learning**: End-to-end ML pipeline with production deployment
- **Backend Development**: FastAPI, RESTful APIs, Docker containerization
- **Frontend Development**: React, TypeScript, responsive design
- **DevOps**: CI/CD, cloud deployment, monitoring

### **Business Impact**
- **Problem Solving**: Addressed real-world fraud detection challenges
- **Performance**: Achieved industry-standard accuracy metrics
- **Scalability**: Built for high-volume transaction processing
- **User Experience**: Professional dashboard with intuitive design

### **Best Practices**
- **Clean Code**: Well-structured, documented, and tested
- **Documentation**: Comprehensive technical and user documentation
- **Version Control**: Professional Git workflow and commit history
- **Deployment**: Production-ready with proper CI/CD pipeline

---

<div align="center">

**⭐ Star this repository if you found it helpful!**

[**🚀 View Live Demo**](https://anomaly-detector-g2ex.onrender.com) | [**📖 Documentation**](docs/) | [**🐙 Source Code**](https://github.com/BernardOforiBoateng/finance-anomaly-detector)

</div>
